Throughout my fifteen-hour flight to the United States in 2017, I was overwhelmed by excitement, knowing that in a few hours, I will reunite with my husband in America and build a new happy family.  Little did I know that adapting to life in the United States would be filled with numerous obstacles. I found myself in a foreign and more complex culture. Realizing that I knew no one other than my spouse started to impact my confidence. I felt like a stranger, and to adapt quickly was a significant challenge.
Furthermore, I realized that my dental degree was not transferable, and I was not able to practice dentistry. Indeed life became seriously challenging in no time; Somehow, I started to notice that my struggles are becoming a source of inspiration. At the end of 2017, I completed the first part of NBDE only a few weeks before giving birth to my beloved child. I studied for Part Two with my one-year-old in my lap. I was proud to have accomplished this on my own without my supportive parents, considering that they have been my biggest motivators and supporters. I felt empowered and fueled to achieve more.  Not to mention volunteering at the University of Iowa hospital allowed me to gain lots of confidence and meet friends who helped me adapt to my new life.


In retrospect, despite growing up in Sudan, a developing country with high illiteracy rates, I consider myself very privileged, having had access to an excellent education. It was my dream to become a dentist, and my parents encouraged me along the way. After graduating high school with straight A’s, I was accepted in Sudan’s top university, The University of Khartoum, where I graduated among the top 5% of my class. During my time in college, pursuing a career in Oral medicine specialty was not yet on my radar; however, during a rotation in Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery as part of a post-grad residency, I was assigned a patient that I will never forget. She was a beautiful five-year-old girl who had been continuously admitted to hospitals and received injections more than she played with toys. Sadly, she had been to many doctors who were not knowledgeable enough to properly manage her case given her condition. Besides, her family struggled with poverty and was unable to afford treatment. She presented with oral manifestations of leukemia, I wanted to help this child or at least mitigate her suffering, yet resources, and my knowledge were limited. Days spent with her were a seriously eye-opening experience; right there and then I realized what I wanted to do — I wanted to have the ability to diagnose and learn all about the proper techniques of managing the different kinds of non-dental oral diseases, especially systemic diseases with oral manifestations. Oral pathology, on the contrary, was my passion since my third lecture with our talented Professor, who made it very comprehensible and interesting. I also spent six months working in her laboratory, assisting with handling specimens and research. That experience boosted my interest in oral oncology. Given my interest in the clinical aspect of oral pathology rather than histopathology, I know that Oral Medicine best fits my career path.

There are two main goals that I hope to achieve upon successfully completing training in Oral Medicine; to become one of the few Sudanese American specialists in Oral Medicine in the world, and to contribute to the profession through research and teaching. Sudan may be known for the massacre of innocent people in Darfur, the recent famous uprising, and the suppression of human freedom; I want it to be known for well-educated and experienced clinicians and researchers. I have always believed in Abraham Maslow’s famous saying: “If you plan on becoming anything less than you are capable of being, you will probably be unhappy all the days of your life.”As a candidate for your program, I will strive to improve my skills to ensure that the well being of my patients remains the utmost priority. I will always remain reliable and respectful for both my colleagues and patients. Completing an Oral Medicine program at an esteemed institution is a dream that I hope will soon become a reality. I know that pursuing a career in Oral medicine requires perseverance and commitment; characteristics I humbly possess.